INTERDEPENDENCE OF CORE, PERIPHERY, AND SEMI-PERIPHERY The world is linked through complex economic systems in which free trade agreements invite participation in market economies that connect regions and countries more than ever before. As a result, international trade has skyrocketed in the last century. In 2018, about 60 percent of the world’s gross domestic product (GDP) was made up of international trade, compared to about 25 percent in 1960. Countries engage in trade when it is mutually beneficial. One country lacks a resource, and another country provides the resource in exchange for money. However, the benefits to both trading partners are not always equal. Globalization is expanding the gap between the core and the periphery and within countries with widening income disparities. Two factors are the basis for trade and impact its benefits: comparative advantage and complementarity.
 Assuming free trade exists, comparative advantage refers to the relative cost advantages of producing certain goods and services for trade. For example, if two countries can both produce corn and computers, it may not make economic sense for both of them to produce these goods for their domestic markets. It may be more cost effective for one to specialize in corn and the other in computers and to trade them. From an economic standpoint, it would be advantageous for countries to produce and export a select range of goods and not make everything themselves. However, countries must consider their available resources, technology, and capital, as well as labor costs, all of which affect comparative advantage. 
Complementarity refers to the mutually beneficial trade relationship between two countries that results when they have different comparative advantages. There must be demand in one place and supply that matches in another. Factors that affect complementarity include variation in the distribution of resources; the relationships between core and peripheral or semi-peripheral countries, in which the periphery supplies raw materials and the core supplies manufactured goods; and the economic advantages of specializing in certain goods. In general, countries export goods that they have a relative advantage in producing in exchange for goods that are less expensive to import than to produce internally. For example, Mexico imports specialty apples from the United States and the United States imports avocados from Mexico because it is more expensive to grow them in their own countries than to import them. 
New trade relationships are fueled by economic development. Countries need raw materials for production, and in general, core countries import natural resources from peripheral countries. The result is an interdependence of countries as part of an interconnected global economy. In many countries of the periphery, globalization leads to commodity dependence, in which the economy is reliant on the export of agricultural products, metals, ores, minerals, oil, or other commodities. Some geographers worry that commodity dependence negatively impacts a country’s economy and can lead to a fixed state of underdevelopment.
NEOLIBERAL POLICIES Neoliberalism is the belief that open markets and free trade (two key characteristics of capitalism) across the globe will lead to economic development everywhere, lessen tensions between countries by fostering support for common values, and spread democracy and human rights. Neoliberal policies encourage free markets and discourage political interference with economic systems. The interdependence of countries in a global economy has led to neoliberal policies that free private enterprise from government involvement and are associated with deregulation and privatization. When the U.S. airline industry was deregulated in 1978, airlines had more freedom to set their own fares and routes. Some countries have privatized their utilities, transferring government control over energy to private companies.
 Free trade agreements are neoliberal policies that are restructuring the world into new, economics-based regions. Groups of countries, referred to as trading blocs, agree to a common set of trading rules in order to encourage trade and reduce trade barriers between the countries in the group. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which took effect in 1994, was an example of a neoliberal regional free trade agreement. NAFTA eliminated tariffs (a tax on imports to make them more expensive) on almost all trade between the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and dramatically increased imports and exports among these countries. The agreement was renegotiated in 2018 and renamed the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. 
Globalization and trade benefit the world economy by increasing efficiency and opening new markets. These have contributed to unprecedented global economic growth. Globalization and trade also contribute to a decrease in worldwide poverty and an overall higher standard of living, and bring technology, jobs, and ideas to new places. 
However, this does not mean that globalization is good for all people everywhere. Globalization hurts economic development in countries with a high commodity dependence. It also contributes to global income inequality; core countries gain more benefits than do peripheral countries, and the flow of capital from rich to poor countries has not occurred as much as neoliberal proponents have anticipated. In Latin America in 2019, many protested the neoliberal policies that have created great inequality in the region. Countries with less-skilled workforces tend not to gain advantages through globalization and are motivated to keep their competitive advantage in providing low-skilled labor. In addition, the absence of environmental and labor standards contributes to pollution and the exploitation of workers in countries vying for a competitive advantage. For example, garment workers in Bangladesh earn less in one month than the average U.S. worker does in one day.
SUPRANATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS Supranationalism, as you learned in Chapter 11, is when three or more countries come together to establish collective policies in response to an international challenge. Many supranational organizations have formed to address challenges associated with international trade and the growing interdependence in the world economy. 
Some supranational organizations have been formed specifically to support neoliberal policies and foster greater globalization through regional trade networks. These trade networks facilitate free trade and open markets, and enhance the competitiveness of the region. To this end, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) was formed in 1979 to foster economic cooperation and integration among its 16 member states. Another organization similar to NAFTA, known as Mercosur (a Spanish acronym for Southern Common Market), was established to create a South American trade bloc. The European Union (EU) likewise was formed to focus on strengthening the economic development of countries within this prominent economic region by eliminating trade barriers (such as tariffs or quotas) between member countries. The EU took efforts a step further, creating a new standard currency shared by 19 member countries that make up the eurozone. In each of these examples, eliminating trade barriers and encouraging free trade facilitate the exchange of goods across international borders. The growing exchange of goods and ideas fosters greater globalization. 
Founded in 1995, the World Trade Organization (WTO) is a supranational organization with 164 member countries from around the world. The goal of the WTO is to provide governments with a forum to negotiate trade agreements, settle disputes, and oversee trade rules. The overriding purpose is to help trade flow as freely as possible. WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by most of the world’s trading countries, are designed to remove obstacles to trade and to ensure that rules are transparent and predictable. Another worldwide supranational organization is the International Monetary Fund (IMF), an organization of 189 countries. Created in 1945, the IMF’s primary mission is to ensure the stability of the international monetary system that enables countries and their citizens to conduct business with each other. Other goals include facilitating international trade, promoting sustainable economic growth, and reducing poverty. It is important to note that the WTO and IMF are controversial. Proponents of free trade point out that these organizations are unnecessary and actually interfere with natural market forces like supply and demand that regulate prices and the amount of goods in a market.
 In theory, members of the WTO operate on equal terms, but the WTO allows some countries to protect industries if the removal of tariffs would result in the loss of vital domestic industries. Food production, steel production, and auto production have all fallen under these protections. In addition, core countries have argued that the loss of jobs should be added to the list of justified tariffs. Critics argue that the WTO’s practices involve politics and that more powerful countries tend to win in such political battles.
 The IMF, too, has fallen under criticism. The IMF makes loans to countries on the condition that specific economic policies are put into action. Advocates point out that the intent of such policies is to reduce corruption and ensure that the funds are used as intended, as well as help to ensure that the country will be able to pay back the loan. Critics contend that the policies interfere with the autonomy of the borrowing country. They also note that the IMF’s policies sometimes make economic situations worse. In 1997, for instance, the IMF required Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand to increase interest rates to reduce their budget deficits. The tight fiscal policies caused a serious economic recession and high unemployment in these countries.
 Some supranational organizations are focused on one industry or commodity. Most influential of these is likely the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC. Initially formed by 5 oil-producing countries in 1960, the coalition has expanded to include 13 member countries across Southwest Asia, Latin America, and Africa, which together control 75 percent of the world’s crude oil reserves. OPEC’s stated mission is to coordinate and unify the policies of member countries to ensure an efficient supply of petroleum to customers. However, one criticism of OPEC is that the organization’s main goal is to make money for its member countries. OPEC’s actions impact the world’s economy because so many industries across the globe rely on oil production. OPEC influences the price and supply of oil that is shipped around the world.
DEINDUSTRIALIZATION In the last century, globalization has led to deindustrialization in many core countries with aging infrastructure and manufacturing processes. These countries could not compete with newly emerging industrial states, like South Korea and China that built new state-of-the-art steel plants and shipbuilding yards. Deindustrialization is the change that occurs with the decline in the percent of workers employed in the secondary sector and a reduction of a region’s industrial capacity or activity, particularly heavy industry and manufacturing. As discussed in Chapter 15, the eventual result is post-industrial cities and regions in which the service industry becomes more important than the manufacturing industry. Deindustrialization has led to more tertiary service-sector jobs with generally lower salaries and fewer benefits in core countries. It has also increased the interdependence between core countries and peripheral or semi-peripheral countries by creating global supply chains. 
Like industrialization, deindustrialization has ripple effects that can have long-term and often unintended consequences for local areas in both the core and the periphery. Deindustrialization leads to the loss of jobs in the industrial sector and contributes to rising unemployment rates. When a plant closes, businesses across the community suffer. In addition to the businesses that once directly supported the plant, stores and restaurants also lose customers and close. Central business districts may decline, and the population may drop, causing a loss of tax dollars.
GOVERNMENT TRADE POLICIES The public and private sectors both play critical roles in national, regional, and local economies. Private-sector organizations—corporations and businesses—are the drivers of economic growth. They determine where they will locate and establish business relationships with suppliers and customers. They also operate within the parameters established by government. Governments make laws to ensure that the economy is stable, and, ideally, that all players within it are treated fairly. Governments also regulate the banking industry and establish trade and monetary policies to provide corporations with an environment that is conducive to doing business. The Federal Reserve, which is the central bank of the United States and part of the public sector, lowers and raises interest rates to either stimulate economic growth or to prevent an unsustainable rise in the price of goods. Interest rates affect lending to businesses and consumers and impact job creation.
 Governments at all scales—national, regional, local—implement policies to spur economic development. At the national level, countries may seek to enhance development in less economically stable areas. China has created special economic zones, using tax and business incentives to attract foreign investment. These zones are discussed in more detail later in the chapter. 
Businesses often choose to locate where there are similar types of businesses in order to take advantage of economies of scale in the workforce. This agglomeration explains the spatial distribution of some industries, such as the location of computer and high-tech manufacturing in Silicon Valley, California, and Bengaluru, India. 
Governments today also try to develop growth poles—places of economic activity clustered around one or more high-growth industries that stimulate economic growth by capitalizing on some special asset. Highly innovative and technically advanced industries, such as research and development, biotech firms, and computer software and hardware development, stimulate opportunities for regional economic development in related businesses. These businesses include suppliers of goods and services, as well as those fulfilling the needs of employees living and working in the area, such as restaurants and banks.
 State and local governments also may seek to attract new business by lowering corporate taxes or offering special tax incentives or cash grants for businesses that are willing to relocate. As an example, in 2017 the state of Wisconsin offered infrastructure improvements and a multibillion-dollar subsidy to convince Foxconn, a large Taiwanese multinational tech company, to build a manufacturing plant in the southeastern part of the state. The plant is expected to produce liquid crystal display screens (LCDs) for phones, televisions, and other products. Similarly, about 30 years ago, South Carolina lured German automaker BMW to build a plant in Spartanburg by offering some $100 million in incentives, including funding to extend a runway at the airport and to improve roads and sewers.
 Providing financial incentives is just one tool that governments use to fuel economic development. Governments may provide workforce training programs, particularly if the economy is in transition from one type of industry to another. In addition, governments seek to provide an environment that is conducive to doing business. This means providing political and economic stability, as well as reliable infrastructure, including transportation and communication networks that require regional and local governments to work together. 
National governments encourage economic development through the use of tariffs. The goal of tariffs is to give domestic businesses an advantage by taxing foreign competitors’ imported products and making them more expensive. The cost of the tariff is included in the resource or product price, which may enable a domestic company to offer goods at a lower price than foreign competitors. This helps domestic businesses create more jobs and possibly pay workers more. But while tariffs protect a country’s industries, including agriculture or mining, they can have a negative impact on the economy. Tariffs limit free trade and reduce competition, which usually results in higher prices for consumers. Quality and innovation also may suffer when there is less competition in the market. 
Imposing tariffs can prompt other countries to respond with their own tariffs. When U.S. President Donald Trump imposed additional tariffs on a wide range of goods imported from China in late 2018, China retaliated with tariffs on U.S. agricultural products. The trade war affected the economies of both countries. As one example, Shanghai General Sports, one of the biggest bicycle manufacturers in China, had to lay off almost one-third of its employees. In South Carolina, Kent Bikes, which imports Shanghai General Sports’ parts, had to raise its prices on bikes to cover the cost of the tariffs on the parts. This contributed to a significant drop in sales and resulted in the layoff of about one-fourth of Kent Bikes’ employees. Ripples of the trade war were felt throughout the world and contributed to an economic slowdown worldwide.
 Free trade agreements among governments eliminate tariffs and often boost trade between the countries involved. Peripheral countries gain manufacturing jobs and core countries gain access to low-cost labor. The United States has trade agreements with more than 20 countries. Since no tariffs are paid on exports to those bound by the agreements, U.S. businesses target their exports to these countries.
