INTRODUCTION TO AGRICULTURE
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Agriculture is the purposeful cultivation of plants or raising of animals to produce goods for survival. The first crops to be harvested through agriculture were food crops, such as fruits, vegetables, and grains, the most widespread being corn (or maize), wheat, and rice. Other crops, such as oats and alfalfa, are important for feeding livestock. Agriculture is more than growing food—though that is the primary purpose of farming and livestock-raising in many parts of the world. Fiber crops, such as cotton, are used for textile and paper products. And oil crops can be used for consumption or for industrial purposes. For example, olives, corn, and soybeans may be harvested and processed into oils used for cooking, for machinery lubrication, or as biofuel. Geographers study agriculture to understand how humans have modified the environment to sustain themselves. The types and patterns of agricultural production and the processes that affect these patterns exist at a range of scales. Observing these global, regional, and local patterns informs geographers about the sustainability of agricultural practices, especially in food production.
GLOBAL CROPLAND, 2015
A map shows global croplands in 2015.  The map shows croplands located in the western half of the United States, central Canada, the west coast of South America, central Africa, throughout Europe, south western Russia, India, eastern China, Indonesia, and the southernmost part of Australia. A callout points to China and reads, ''China has 8.8 percent of the world's cropland within its borders. Cropland covers 18 percent of the entire country.'' A callout points to India and reads, ''India has the highest percentage of the world's cropland: 9.6 percent.'' A callout points to the United States and reads, ''Cropland covers 18 percent of the United States, which contains 8.9 percent of the world's cropland.''
READING MAPS A recent study revised what geographers had previously thought about Earth’s cropland. India, rather than China or the United States, ranks first, with 9.6 percent of the world’s net cropland area.  Describe the cropland percentages in the United States or in China.

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS Cultivating plants or raising animals requires adaptation to environmental limitations. Sunlight, water, and nutrients are all factors that affect plant growth. Agriculture is bound to the physical environment, and four factors have a profound effect on the agriculture that can take place there: climate, which includes temperature and precipitation; elevation; soil; and topography. You’ve read that climate is the long-term patterns of weather in a particular area. (Weather is what happens today: sunny or cloudy, rainy or snowy, hot or cold.) Climate is a major influencer of agricultural choices and practices because it provides precipitation and temperatures needed for seeds to germinate, plants to grow, or livestock to have the food needed to survive. Water, from natural precipitation or irrigation, critically provides the moisture plants and animals require. Temperature is the key factor in determining the growing season—the length of the year during which plant life can grow. Generally, the greater the distance from the Equator, the shorter the growing season. At the Equator and in the tropics, the growing season can be year-round. In the temperate and subarctic zones, however, the colder temperatures of winter prevent plant growth for a varying number of weeks or months. In those regions, the growing season is measured in the number of frost-free days, as frost can kill plants. Elevation also affects the growing season and what plants can be grown. Each increase of 1,000 feet above sea level means a corresponding decrease of about 3.6° F in average temperature. As a result, the higher the elevation, the shorter the growing season. Elevation can create different cultivation opportunities in all mountainous regions. For example, in tropical regions in Central America and South America, the hotter lowlands are used to grow tropical crops such as bananas and sugarcane. In the next highest zone, farmers can grow coffee, corn, and other vegetables. At higher elevations, crops must be hardier, like barley and potatoes. Higher still, the land can only be used for grazing livestock because only grasses can grow there.
An infographic shows what types of agriculture are performed at various altitudes in Central and South America.  The infographic is shaped like a mountain. There are markings up the mountain corresponding to the altitude. Data in the infographic are as follows.  Sea level to 2,500 feet, Tierra Caliente or Tropical Rain Forest, Bananas, sugarcane, rice. Other tropical crops, and some livestock.  2,500 to 6,000 feet, Tierra Templada, this is the zone with the largest human population, Sheep, cattle, dairy, vegetables, coffee, corn (maize), and small grains.  6,000 to 12,000 feet, Tierra Fria, this is the highest zone in Central America, Barley, potatoes, grazing, and dairy operations.  12,000 to 15,000 feet, Tierra Helada (Punta), this is the tree line, grazing (alpacas, llamas, sheep).  Above 15,000 feet, Tierra Nevada or the snow line, no agriculture above this point.
ALTITUDINAL ZONATION Central America and South America both show how elevation can affect agriculture.  Explain how climate is a factor in the elevation zones in the diagram.

Soil, a vital factor in determining the agricultural potential of a given area, is the biologically active coating of Earth’s surface. This layer can range from a few inches to several feet in depth. It is formed by the weathering of rock by wind, water, and other factors, which break the rock into increasingly smaller pieces over an extremely long period. It can take thousands of years to form an inch of soil. Soil has four constituent parts: mineral particles, water, air, and organic matter like decaying plant material. The key characteristics of soil are its fertility, texture, and structure. Topography, or an area’s land features, includes the slope of that land, which affects the ability of the soil to stay in place and retain water. The steeper the slope, the more likely the soil will be affected by runoff. Slope can also be a factor in land productivity due to the position of the land toward or away from the sun, which affects how much of the sun’s energy the land receives. The most favorable land for growing crops has ideal temperatures, precipitation, soils, and slope. Sometimes landscapes are modified for better environmental factors. Terrace building for farming protects soil on steep slopes, while irrigation or drainage schemes influence water availability. (You will read about these agricultural practices in depth in Chapter 14.) Adding fertilizers enhances the soil fertility of cropland. In general, it is not feasible to modify the other environmental factors—soil texture, soil depth, soil mineral content, temperature, and terrain—at large scales.
CLIMATE Climate varies greatly across the globe and is based on four key factors: distance from the Equator, wind and ocean currents, proximity to large bodies of water, and topography. These components interact with one another in different ways to create different climate regions. Distance from the Equator determines the length of daylight and average temperatures. The Equator and the regions near it to the north and south, called the tropics, receive direct rays from the sun year-round. These regions have nearly equal periods of daylight and nighttime every day and are warm throughout the year. The northern and southern limits of these warmer regions are called the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn, respectively. Just to the north and south of the tropics are huge dry bands containing deserts including the Sahara, Kalahari, Sonora, and Atacama. Farther north and south of the desert bands are the temperate zones—large bands between the tropics and the frigid polar circles that have hot summers, cold or cool winters, and transitional springs and autumns. Ocean and wind currents circulate cold or warm water and air masses over Earth’s surface. The circulation of water and air masses in turn affects patterns of temperature and precipitation. Ocean currents that flow north and south transfer heat between lower latitudes (close to the Equator) and higher latitudes (farther from the Equator). When these currents flow away from the Equator, they bring warmth to temperate zones. For example, in January, the Gulf Stream carries warm water from the Gulf of Mexico into the Atlantic Ocean, where the current travels north along the eastern coast of North America before moving east toward Europe. Currents flowing from a temperate zone toward the Equator carry colder water in that direction. Winds also carry air at different temperatures from one region to another. Because warmer air tends to hold more moisture and colder air tends to be drier, these wind patterns affect precipitation patterns. Location relative to large bodies of water affects climate in two ways. First, these bodies of water warm and cool more slowly than land. As a result, most coastal areas tend to have milder climates than regions farther inland. Second, coastal areas are cooled during the day by cool winds displaced by warmer air rising from the water. These regions are warmed at night by warm air blowing onshore as cooler night air pushes down toward the water. Location also affects precipitation, which tends to be heavier near coastlines and lighter farther inland, with some exceptions. You read that elevation can affect temperature even in the tropical zone, but topography impacts climate in other ways. Coastal mountains have much heavier precipitation on the side facing the wind, and very light precipitation on the side away from the wind. This effect can be seen in the Pacific Northwest of the United States, which produces temperate rain forests along the Pacific Coast and dry conditions in areas such as the Yakima Valley of Washington State.
A photo shows men harvesting tea leaves using cutters in a plantation. They carry large bags around their neck to collect the leaves.
Agricultural practices are impacted by climatic conditions. For example, in the tropical climate of Malawi, tea fields are built along the contours of the sloping landscape to slow erosion. Terrace farming is another way to reduce soil erosion and water loss.