EVOLVING OPPORTUNITIES. Gender roles are generalized “normal” roles that men and women are expected to perform in their everyday lives, bounded by social and behavioral norms as practiced in a society. In most societies across the world, people who support these gender roles believe that a man’s role is breadwinner and head of the household, while a woman’s role is primary caretaker in the home, handling domestic duties and raising children. As you read in Chapter 6, traditional gender roles often keep women from playing a part in certain aspects of society and push women to fulfill cultural expectations that can be limiting. However, with economic development, societies change—and so do the roles of women, men, and even children. 
Industrialization brought working-class women into the workforce with factory jobs, and postindustrial economies have offered women greater opportunities in both education and employment. As countries became more economically developed, the disparity in gender roles diminished. But this imbalance hasn’t been eliminated. While education has become more equal—more than half of U.S. college students are women—men still make more money overall: on average, women earn roughly 80 percent of what men do for the same work. Other economic disparities exist as well. Globally, women don’t share the benefits of development equally with men. Women in the United States are less likely to hold supervisory and managerial roles, and when they do, they tend to carry less authority. Even so, economic and social restructuring changes how people live, earn their livelihoods, and practice their gender roles. 
RURAL AND URBAN OPPORTUNITIES Gender parity begins with equal opportunities. Economic changes often result in gender equity changes, and vice versa. For example, in rural areas in peripheral countries, women are starting to find opportunities outside the home in factories and in the service sector, which adds to the household income. This, in turn, creates economic growth. One example of all-female entrepreneurship is occurring in Guatemala, in the tiny village of Urlanta. The initiative started with 29 village women, all with different knowledge and skill sets. They decided to try beekeeping. After some struggles, the women were able to extract and bottle honey and sell it at a profit. In Urlanta, the community mindset shifted. Before the beekeeping enterprise, the village women were expected only to stay home and raise children. They are now welcome participants in village meetings, sharing their experiences and offering advice to others. 
It may be easy to think that urban areas have more economic opportunities for women. Generally, urban areas offer a greater array of services and infrastructure, opportunities for education and employment, and fewer social and cultural restrictions. But access to opportunities really depends on the location. In some regions—particularly North Africa, Southwest Asia, and South Asia—urban areas present a greater number of challenges, inequities, and insecurities for women. Women struggle with finding decent well-paying jobs, increasing workloads while juggling jobs and care at home, accessing financial assets, interacting with city and area authorities, and having housing security and personal security. The biggest challenge is dealing with traditional behaviors toward women’s roles; many men in these urban areas don’t allow women to easily participate in the job market. In many countries, strong attitudes about gender roles continue to make it difficult for women to break away from child-rearing and home life. 
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES Despite the overall trend of a continued gender gap, attitudes about women in the workforce are changing, and women are playing a larger part in the global economy. As women start to contribute to household incomes, roles are shifting; men and families see how two incomes can benefit a household. Much of the industrialization in countries in the periphery now relies on women working outside the home (because of the lower wage rates, which remains an issue). In addition, women in peripheral and semi-peripheral regions are edging into the service industry, and this trend is happening in core regions as well, thanks to huge growth in the tertiary sector.
 The cultures of some countries are beginning to realize the value of women in economic roles. For example, women in Japan have not traditionally played a role in the workforce. However, since Japan’s economy has been hindered over the past several decades by its aging and dwindling population, circumstances have changed. The government implemented an economic plan that focuses on eliminating the employment gender gap: it expects to see an increase of 13 percent in the country’s Gross Domestic Product as a result of this initiative. Saudi Arabia is also focusing on a shift in women’s roles in the economy. With recent drops in oil prices, government officials are looking at ways to diversify its economy by investing in human capital—including that of women.
 In the United States, roles for women have expanded, and the number of women working outside the home is rising. In 2017, there were more than 74 million female workers in the workforce, making up 47 percent of workers. The range of occupations has expanded; in many occupations, such as speech-language pathologists, dental assistants, social workers, physical therapists, and pharmacists, more than 50 percent are women. Women are making notable gains in professional and managerial occupations as well. In 1974, only 1 in 10 lawyers were women; in 2016, 1 in 3 were women. In 2017, well over half of human resources managers and education administrators were women.
 But in some instances, the roles of women remain little changed. In higher-level managerial positions, only 27 percent of chief executives are women, and just 7 percent of construction managers are women. A Morgan Stanley report in 2017 stated, “More gender diversity, particularly in corporate settings, can translate to increased productivity, greater innovation, better decision-making, and higher employee retention and satisfaction.” The number of opportunities has increased, but an obvious need for more women at this level persists.
 EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES Until recently, women in many parts of the world have been denied access to education. This situation can severely limit all connections and opportunities a woman has during her lifetime. Women’s health, limited future prospects, lower income, and increased vulnerability to exploitation and trafficking severely inhibit female growth. This hindrance, in turn, can cripple the economic advancement of a country. 
As countries evolve and make strides in their economic and social development, women have greater access to educational opportunities, which leads to positive progress toward gender parity. Exposure to educational opportunities also encourages women to explore specialized careers, which can increase income possibilities, provide empowerment, lower birth rates, and create a variety of fulfilling activities for women outside the home. All these factors can help raise households and communities out of poverty and support national development.
An interesting correlation exists between education and fertility rates. A 2015 study in Ethiopia reported that 61 percent of women with no schooling have a baby before they turn 20, compared with 16 percent of women with eight years of schooling. Recall that the education dimension of the Human Development Index (HDI) is access to education. In most cases, women with more education tend to marry later and have fewer, healthier children. It’s important to note, though, that studies show that other factors besides education can lower the total fertility rate, such as access to health care, additional work opportunities, and reduced child mortality. But education certainly plays a role.
 Many public and private organizations—at local, national, and international levels—provide educational opportunities to break down the barriers that limit education access for women and girls around the world. Some obstructions are harder to crack, such as cultural traditions and religious restrictions, but others can be chipped away. Groups working to help women and girls contribute scholarships and loans, build schools to decrease the distances girls have to travel to get to school, create gender-sensitive curricula, ensure safe and inclusive learning environments, and invite men to join gender equality discussions.
 In many places, girls struggle with social norms and economic challenges that threaten their ability to attend and remain in school. An organization in southern Africa created an innovative program that uses mobile-based technology to build digital skills to help empower girls and encourage them to continue their education. And a group called the Asia Foundation is working to increase literacy across the continent, with a huge focus in Afghanistan. The organization provides study kits to schools for girls to help these students pass entrance exams and gain entry to four-year national universities.
GIRLS’ EDUCATION LEVELS AROUND THE WORLD, 2019 Many countries have high rates of girls finishing primary school, but they often fall short in graduation rates and quality of secondary schools; the global average in 2019 was 7.6 years of schooling. Each circle on the graph represents the average number of years of schooling for girls for one country. For example, the average for the United States was 13.4 years of schooling. The countries with the lowest and the highest averages in their regions—such as Bhutan and Sri Lanka in South Asia—are labeled as well. 
WAGES More educational opportunities for women have emerged over time, which means that women now have a better chance at earning higher wages. However, a wage gap between men and women still exists, even in core countries—although this is where the greatest strides to decrease the wage gap have been taken. In 2018, women in Iceland protested against unfair pay. At the time, Icelandic women were paid 74 percent of the average wage of Icelandic men. In response, demonstrators declared that women should work 74 percent of the eight-hour workday. The protest worked. The following year, Iceland created a law requiring employers with 25 or more workers—in both the government and the private sector—to prove that they pay men and women equally for the same work.
 In June 2019, women in Switzerland made a similar objection. Although Switzerland is one of the world’s richest countries, women there were also frustrated by unequal pay. Thousands demonstrated by skipping work, ignoring household responsibilities, and marching in the streets. The 2019 protest marked the 28th anniversary of the first protest women made in Switzerland regarding unequal pay. 
In the United States in 2017, women on average made 81 cents for every dollar a man makes. Studies show that education does not determine wage equality. According to a 2012 study, women who graduated with a business degree earned on average $38,000 their first year out of college, whereas men earned $45,000. Additionally, wage disparity can be tied to women pursuing professions commonly filled by women, taking time off to care for children, and choosing lower-paying jobs that allow for more flexibility. Wage disparity exists unevenly throughout the United States. In 2019, the worst states for equality were Wyoming, West Virginia, Alabama, North Dakota, and Louisiana, where women earned just 69 cents for every dollar earned by men. In contrast, California had the narrowest difference in the country, with women earning 88 cents for every dollar earned by men. The other states in the top five were New York, Maryland, and Nevada; Washington, D.C., also made the top five. Wage inequality also occurs along racial lines. White women and Asian American women, on average, make more than Hispanic, African-American, or Native American women.
Even workplaces in the spotlight have wage inequality. The U.S. women’s soccer team won a historic fourth World Cup victory in 2019. Their record-breaking triumphs were undeniably impressive, yet female team members were paid just 38 percent of what their male counterparts earned. The women’s team sued U.S. Soccer in federal court for gender discrimination and violations of the Equal Pay Act and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The result of the lawsuit could affect wage disparities for other female professional athletes in the United States and around the world.
EMPOWERING WOMEN. In addition to providing more economic and educational opportunities for women, other endeavors seek to empower women. In places across the globe, women are still subject to violence, social injustice, and a lack of health care. Many women have been conditioned to believe that they are not worthy of the right to food and shelter, to be educated, to work, or to be free. They may not realize that they are robbed of basic human rights. Some countries make it legally impossible for women to accept higher-paying jobs, and in others, a husband can legally deny his wife the opportunity to work outside the home. 
Several initiatives aim to provide independence and choices for women and continue to make strides toward equality. In coordination with African governments and regional organizations, the United Nations has written several protocols and decrees for human rights and inclusion, with an emphasis on gender equality and the empowerment of women in Africa. As African countries continue to develop economically, they turn their focus to women. The result is a stronger presence in the workforce across the African continent. While women still work longer hours and earn less money than men, African women overall are highly entrepreneurial. In some countries, such as Rwanda and Ghana, women run nearly one-half of all businesses in the country.
 MICROLOANS In recent years, women in peripheral and semi-peripheral countries have started applying for loans to start small businesses. For them, being an entrepreneur is the answer to breaking away from poverty and improving financial security for their family and children. Microloans are very small short-term loans with low interest intended to help people in need. Microloans became one option for women wanting to take a risk on their own enterprises. Most of the women obtaining the loans would not qualify for loans from a traditional bank, so nongovernment organizations searched for ways to make loans available. 
The microloan industry was started by a Bangladeshi professor who eventually opened the Grameen Bank, a microloan institution. Other microloan institutions followed, and the industry has flourished. In 2015, market analysts determined that an estimated 125 million people worldwide—about 80 percent of whom were women—received a total of about $100 billion (U.S.) in microloans from the key microfinance institutions. Microloans range in size depending on location, from a low of about $200 in South Asia to a high of nearly $3,000 in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The amounts are based on the borrower, the entrepreneurial opportunity, the location, and the income variation. Microloans cover startup costs for a variety of businesses, such as the cost of nail polish for setting up a home-based nail salon or an individual purchasing chickens to sell the eggs. Many of the loans also cover education costs. Numerous microloan institutions offer business training and other resources. This small amount of financial help greatly contributes to leveling the playing field. 
Many women have succeeded in business thanks to getting their start from a microloan. Take the example of Oiness, a single mother of three in Zambia, who lives in a remote rural village with few employment opportunities. She realized she could start a business selling small, portable cooking stoves to people in her community. Thanks to a microloan, she was able to buy the materials she needed to make the stoves. When she started earning money, she reinvested those funds into her business, so it grew. She now earns enough money to send all of her children to school. 
Obtaining a microloan in and of itself does not ensure success. Starting, running, and maintaining a business is tough. However, as more women become successful business owners in poorer countries, gender inequality continues to narrow in those areas. 
INVESTING IN GIRLS AND WOMEN As countries develop, more attention and money can be invested in issues relevant to women. According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), four key strategies need increased investment: (1) Ensure that financial assets are in the hands of women. (2) Keep girls in school. (3) Improve reproductive health and access to family planning. (4) Support women’s leadership. 
These strategies coincide with the goals in the UN’s 2030 Agenda. To reach these goals, the United Nations thinks that every country must make public services available for women, confront and overcome the cultural and social norms that hold back women and girls, put voluntary family planning back on the development agenda, gather evidence about which methods in the agenda work, and accurately track the proportion and coverage of aid focused on achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment.
CASE STUDY. IN 1983, MUHAMMAD YUNUS STARTED THE GRAMEEN BANK, which means “rural” or “village” bank in Bengali. He reasoned that if financial resources could be made available to poverty-stricken people through reasonable and appropriate terms and conditions, then “these millions of small people with their millions of small pursuits can add up to create the biggest development wonder.”
CASE STUDY. Yunus got the idea for the bank when he was an economics professor in Bangladesh. One day he took his students on a field trip to a small rural village In India. They interviewed a woman who was making bamboo stools to sell. After paying for the bamboo, she barely made a profit from her sales. Yunus loaned her money, and she was able to buy her raw material at a cheaper price because she was able to buy it in volume. The result: she made a larger profit. Yunus and his students studied her continuing business, and they realized the key to survival and economic growth for this woman—and many others like her—was just a little bit of money: a small loan. 
CASE STUDY. The Grameen Bank offers microloans, or microcredit, with no collateral required, no legal contracts, low interest, and comfortable repayment plans. The bank provides loans to pay for raw materials, livestock, agriculture, grocery shops, and cell phones. Products made from these loans go to local markets, the main market in the capital city, and markets all over the world.
CASE STUDY. Borrowers repay monthly installments to bank representatives who visit them, listen to their stories, and discuss business successes and challenges. Money earned by women borrowers has a huge impact on their families, and these women tend to save their money or invest it, rather than spend it. In 2006, the Grameen Bank and its founder were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize “for their efforts to create economic and social development from below.” 
CASE STUDY. The success of Grameen Bank has led to the creation of many other microloan institutions, and borrowers are found in every corner of the world. Yunus is proud of what he started and the women he has helped. “There are roughly 160 million people all over the world in microcredit, mostly women,” he said in 2017. “And they have proven one very important thing: that we are all entrepreneurs.”
