Development in the general sense is the process of change in the nature and activities of the economy of a region or country and subsequent increases in the prosperity of that place. This chapter focuses on human development—the processes involved in the improvement of people’s freedoms, rights, capabilities, choices, and material conditions. Although the development of individuals is important, the concept of human development in this case applies to the collective population of a country or region. Geographers look at economic and social indicators in categories such as available resources, productivity, and education to measure the standard of living of a population.
 As you have learned, geographers categorize the overall development of countries as core, periphery, or semi-periphery. Core countries represent the most diversified economies, highest levels of education, greatest levels of productivity, most advanced technologies, and highest standards of living. Countries in the periphery have less-diverse economies, lower levels of education and productivity, insufficient health-care systems and infrastructure, and lower standards of living. Between the core countries and peripheral countries are semi-peripheral countries, which share some elements of both. Countries in the semi-periphery have growing economies (often through industrializing); improving infrastructures, health care, and education systems; and standards of living that fall between those of core countries and peripheral countries.
 Every country can be placed into one of these categories. However, within countries, there may be distinct regional differences in standards of living. In Unit 6, you learned that standards of living vary even within communities. This country-level data masks unequal development within countries. This information can be better understood by changing the scale of analysis. 
Economic welfare, as measured by the wealth or income of a country, is not the sole indicator of overall well-being. But it is a crucial quantitative measure that can lead to an understanding of a country’s level of development and thus standard of living. 
Ways to measure a population’s wealth include: Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the total value of the goods and services produced by a country’s citizens and companies within the country in a year. Gross National Product (GNP), the total value of the goods and services produced by a country’s citizens and companies both domestically and internationally in a year.Gross National Income (GNI) per capita (per person), the total value of goods and services globally produced by a country in a year divided by the country’s population
GDP and GNP can also be converted into per capita data. For example, GDP per capita is the Gross Domestic Product divided by a country’s midyear population. Per capita estimations help put a country’s overall well-being in perspective. GNP—which excludes products manufactured by other countries in a host country as well as earnings and spending of nonresidents—reflects a country’s real income. However, GNP is often not the most accurate measure, as it is affected by international exchange rates. The United States stopped using GNP as an indicator in 1991, and the World Bank prefers to use GNI per capita when considering the health of a country’s economy.
 The measure of GNI per capita is calculated using earned income rather than production output. Countries that rank high on the World Bank list feature a high amount of international investment and aid as well as a large number of international corporations. The variation between a country’s GDP and GNI can be very small if the difference between a country’s income and its global payments is minimal. For example, in 2018, the GNI per capita of the United States was only 1.5 percent higher than the U.S. GDP per capita.
Though economic welfare is an essential measure of a population, income distribution provides insight into a society’s overall health. Some high-income economies seem prosperous, but uneven distribution of income may mask high levels of poverty. Brazil, for example, has a dramatic disparity between its wealthiest citizens and the rest of its residents. Brazil’s six richest individuals have the same amount of wealth as the poorest 50 percent of the population (around 100 million people). About 16 million Brazilians live below the country’s poverty line. Countries with a more even income distribution have less poverty and a greater sense of equity within the population, which often equals political stability and a healthier populace. 
Economic structure. The structure of an economy is another measure of development. Economic structure is connected to economic prosperity, and the level of development of a country can be predicted by examining the country’s economic structure. Most diversified economies result from populations who work in every economic sector, which you learned about in Chapter 18. As countries develop, the percentage of the population operating in different sectors of the economy often shifts; for instance, more workers move from the primary sector (agriculture) to the secondary sector (manufacturing). This shift increases productivity, which in turn strengthens a country’s economic success. More development enhances jobs in the tertiary sector (services), which also adds to a country’s economic prosperity. As countries flourish, the quaternary and quinary sectors (knowledge sectors) bloom. Information technology expands, scientific research is promoted, and media extends to the farthest reaches of the country. 
In addition to classifying economic sectors, the structure of an economy can also be broken into two categories: the formal sector and the informal sector. The formal sector includes businesses, enterprises, and other economic activities that have government supervision, monitoring, and protection, and are taxed. The taxes collected from businesses and workers most often are used by a country to finance a variety of public services.
 In the United States, money collected by the government funds Social Security (a federal system that provides retirement, disability, and survivors’ benefits), health insurance programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, defense and international security systems, safety net programs that provide aid, and interest on money the U.S. government has borrowed from banks. A small portion of these funds goes to public services like education, environmental programs, food and drug safety, and infrastructure. Workers in this sector have a formal contract with their employer, predefined job responsibilities, a guarantee of safe work conditions, a fixed duration of work time, wages or a salary, and coverage by Social Security for health and life risks, such as becoming disabled and not being able to work
. The informal sector, sometimes called the informal economy, is any part of a country’s economy that is outside of government monitoring or regulation and is not taxed. Individuals and businesses in the informal sector typically deal in cash and include a wide range of money-making activities: street vendors hawking flowers or candies, unlicensed and unregulated food or beverage stands, cleaning or moving services, and more. In contrast, some street vendors—such as food trucks in the United States and certain taco stands in Mexico—are in the formal sector because they are licensed and pay location fees and sales taxes. But workers in the informal sector do not have formal employment contracts, regulated work conditions, or fixed hours of work. They may not be paid regularly or evenly, and are not covered by any worker health and safety protections or social security system. These workers are sometimes in less-than-safe working situations and are especially vulnerable to downturns in business.
The back of a pick-up truck serves as a fruit stand on the street in the historic center of Mexico City. Street vendors are often part of the informal economic sector.
It’s difficult to accurately measure the financial or social impact of informal sector activities. Without government interaction, many of these economic activities aren’t documented and can’t be traced. Likewise, the informal sector is not included in the GDP or GNI of a country. As a result, many countries surely have greater income than their official statistics suggest. Informal economies are active all over the globe. In core countries, the informal sector represents anywhere from 10 to 20 percent of a country’s income. Phrases such as “under the table” and “off the books” reflect this untaxed, cash economy. In peripheral countries, the informal sector is much larger, representing as much as 50 percent of a country’s income. Although critics claim that the informal sector is unmanageable and can hinder a growing economy, other experts argue that it provides financial opportunities for people at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder, and most say that it is growing. 
FOSSILE FUELS AND renewable energy. Measuring the use of fossil fuels (hydrocarbon-containing material of biological origin that can be burned for energy) or of renewable energy (energy from a source that is not depleted when used) can indicate a country’s level of development. Fossil fuels, like coal, oil, and gas, were introduced during the Industrial Revolution. These fuels powered plants, factories, and homes. In the approximately 250 years since the Industrial Revolution began, the world has come to rely on fossil fuels for its main energy supply.
 All countries use fossil fuels for electricity, transportation, heat, and fuel for automobiles. More than 29 countries depend on fossil fuels for at least 90 percent of their energy, and 5 countries—Brunei, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia—are 100 percent reliant. These countries have large deposits of fossil fuels, which gives them primary access to these sources that drive their economies. When making energy decisions, countries utilize their natural resources or what they can purchase to generate the power they need. But countries also explore ways to use renewable energy and alternative fuel sources. China is the biggest generator of global wind power and also produces the most solar energy in the world. Considering that fossil fuels are nonrenewable and could eventually become depleted, and the fact that burning fossil fuels harms the environment, planning for and implementing renewable energy programs improves a country’s energy infrastructure and development.
Social indicators. Geographers also use noneconomic factors, such as fertility rates, infant mortality rates, literacy rates, life expectancy data, access to health care, and measures of democracy, to help complete the analysis of a country’s level of development. These social, cultural, and political factors may not directly affect the level of national income and output, but they are the cause and the effect of a population’s well-being.
 As you have read, the total fertility rate (TFR) is the average number of children one woman in a given region or country will have during her childbearing years. Social factors that affect a country’s TFR include level of health care and level of education for women. The total fertility rate is high in most peripheral countries, and although it has been trending down in recent years, the TFR still remains higher than the rates in core and semi-peripheral countries. In the 1990s, Afghanistan’s TFR was about 7.5, one of the highest in the world at the time. The country’s fertility rate in 2017 was 4.5. Improvements in health care, sanitation, and diet—along with better access to hospitals and medicine—generally cause a decline in the number of births. But when access to health care and education is limited, fertility rates skyrocket. In 2017, the countries with the highest TFRs were Niger (7.0), Somalia (6.2), and the Democratic Republic of Congo (6.0). All three countries in the periphery had fewer than 0.2 doctors per 1,000 people. In contrast, there were 4.0 doctors per 1,000 people in Argentina—a semi-peripheral country—the same year, and its TFR was 2.3.
Cultural factors, such as the status of women and religions or traditions that encourage couples to have large families, affect total fertility rates as well. Women with higher levels of education and those who pursue careers generally have fewer children. In countries with fewer formal employment opportunities or where women face barriers to work outside the home, women are likely to have more children. Political factors, such as government-sponsored family-planning efforts, can impact the TFR and population growth, too. 
You learned that the infant mortality rate (IMR) is the number of deaths of children under the age of 1 per 1,000 live births. The IMR is a good indicator of maternal and infant health, which itself is a reliable gauge of quality of health care. Globally, the leading causes of infant deaths are preterm birth complications, birth defects, and diseases such as pneumonia, diarrhea, and malaria. Leading causes of infant deaths in the United States include birth defects, preterm births, and low birth weights. Like total fertility rate, the infant mortality rate is higher in peripheral countries and lower in core countries; Chad’s IMR was 73.1 in 2017, while the United States had an infant mortality rate of 5.8 that same year. High IMRs are connected to higher percentages of people who live in poverty. 
Life expectancy, the average number of years a person is expected to live, is a powerful indicator of health from prenatal to elderly care. And access to comprehensive, quality health care is a dependable measure of a country’s standard of living. When a population can maintain good health, prevent and manage diseases, and reduce disabilities and premature death through attainable health care, its citizens can work, produce, and create income, which in turn creates a healthy economy. In peripheral and semi-peripheral countries with low per capita income and often-fractured governments, health care for many of their residents is difficult to obtain. Countries in which people do not have access to immunizations, medications, antibiotics, and sanitary water are often economically underdeveloped. 
Literacy rates and education standards are important measures of development as well. Literacy provides people with a set of skills required to function effectively in contemporary societies, and it also empowers them intellectually. Higher levels of literacy can drive the successful economic development of a country, especially in today’s rapidly changing, technology-driven world. But while global literacy rates are higher than ever, challenges remain. Many marginalized children who are poor or live in rural areas do not have access to educational opportunities. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, countries such as Niger and South Sudan struggle with literacy rates below 30 percent.
The United Nations uses the Human Development Index (HDI) to determine overall levels of development of countries. This measure incorporates three key dimensions of human development: life expectancy at birth (health dimension), access to education measured in expected and mean years of schooling (education dimension), and standard of living measured by GNI per capita (economic dimension). In short, the HDI is a summary measure—scaled from 0.0 to 1.0—of basic achievement levels reached through an average of each examined dimension.
 When determining HDI, health and education indicators are just as important as economic indicators. In 2018, the United States had a GNI per capita of $63,080, and its HDI ranking was 15 out of 189 countries and territories. Countries such as Ireland and Germany both had lower GNI per capita. But since these countries have higher life expectancies than the United States, both Ireland and Germany had a higher HDI. Qatar had the highest GNI per capita at $124,410, but its HDI was ranked 41 because of fewer years of schooling. Cyprus’s GNI per capita was only $39,880, but Cyprus’s HDI rank was 31 because of relatively high life expectancy rates.
 When looking at these rankings, it’s important to understand the theory of purchasing power parity (PPP). This concept measures economic variables in different countries so that exchange rates don’t distort across-the-board comparisons. In essence, PPP is synonymous with “international dollars.” 
Although the HDI score is an important measure of spatial variation in levels of development among states, it has limitations. The HDI is a simplified calculation and doesn’t capture every aspect of human development. It doesn’t reflect other quality-of-life factors, such as poverty, gender equality, environmental quality, sustainability, or an overall feeling of security or even of happiness. The HDI also doesn’t take into account that in many countries, some groups—perhaps ethnic minorities, followers of a minority religion, or speakers of a minority language—don’t have access to the same opportunities for income, education, or health care. Additionally, the HDI does not consider the political dimensions of human development.
The UN and other organizations also collect and share other data—such as a country’s rate of economic growth, expansion of employment opportunities, and the success of initiatives undertaken—to help leaders and policy makers evaluate and work to improve quality of life within a country.
 