 
Questions:  Rostow’s Stages of Economic Growth  


 Rostow categorized countries from traditional to modern.



  Stage 1: Traditional Society  


In the simplest form of organization, political power is local, regional, or based on land.



  Stage 2: Preconditions for Takeoff  


Progressive elements begin to form, and people seek knowledge and break free from the tradition. 



 Stage 3: Takeoff  


Political, social, and institutional frameworks in social change. Urbanization and infrastructure improve.



  Stage 4: Drive to Maturity  


The economy keeps progressing in a period of selfsustained growth.



  Stage 5: High Mass Consumption  


Production shifts from industrial manufacturing to consumer goods and services.



 Great Britain, the USA, Canada, Russia, and Singapore with regard to  the model  


Early countries were: Great Britain, USA, and Canada. Singapore is now highly modernized.



 Limitations of the Stages of Economic Growth Model  


Based on old world data and growth differs by region. Does not take in geographic influences or challenges. Assumes all countries follow the same progression of development.



  Wallerstein ’s World System Theory  (core countries, Mexico, Angola)  


Describes the relationships of countries and the development in the world. Core countries have control. Mexico has areas where opportunities are limited.



  Limitations of World System Theory  


The model is too focused on economics. It works as a historical analysis but is not the best measure of modern development.



  Dependency Theory ( how it works, who benefits, what is the underlying cause of  dependency, limitations of the theory)  


It describes the challenges faced by poorer countries and the relationships with richer ones. Peripherals offer cheap materials to the global market. Core buy materials and hire cheap labor.



  Questions:  Commodity Dependence (oil , Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, UN report)  


Commodity dependence: when 60 percent of exports are tied to one thing such as oil. When prices fell, Venezuela could not meet its debt obligations. 



 1. Compare Rostow’s Stages of economic growth, world system  theory, and dependency theory.  


Rostow's models economic growth. Wallerstein's is a development analysis. Dependency theory describes the challenges faced by poorer countries.



 2. Evaluate the degree to which commodity dependence slows and  fuels economic development.  


Commodity dependence can negatively affect economic growth because it increases the vulnerability of commoditydependent countries to negative commodity price shocks.


