GENDER DISPARITIES Although the words parity, equality, and equity are related terms, they are not synonyms. Parity is a balance between two groups. Equality refers to the same level of resources and opportunities for everyone, no matter the location or situation. Equity, however, is about fairness, and it acknowledges how the lack of access to opportunities and certain resources affects underserved people, groups, or communities.
 Ensuring equity means providing additional aid to make sure everyone is treated fairly in all circumstances, according to their needs. So an indicator that compares gender parity between males and females is not equivalent, or similar in value, to one that compares gender equality, which ensures that men and women have equal access to opportunities and resources. And according to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), gender equity is “fairness of treatment for both women and men, according to their respective needs.”
 The level of gender equality can be a measure of a country’s overall level of development. Groups such as the United Nations assess gender parity by looking at wages, educational opportunities, and gender rights—including civil liberties and access to voting. The UN uses two measures to track gender inequality. The first is the Gender Development Index (GDI), which calculates gender disparity in the three basic dimensions of human development: health, knowledge, and standard of living. It measures the female Human Development Index (HDI) as a percentage of the male HDI. Current GDI calculations show factors in which a difference between women and men exists as well as where near equity is achieved.
The second measure of gender inequality is the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which calculates inequality based on three categories: reproductive health, empowerment, and labor-market participation. The GII ranges from 0.0 to 1.0; 0.0 shows that men and women share equal roles, and 1.0 shows that women have little equality. In 2017, Afghanistan had a GII score of 0.653, whereas Belgium scored 0.048. Mexico came in at 0.343, Canada had 0.092, and the United States had 0.189.
 The World Bank and other international entities determined that gender equality contributes to the overall development or growth of an economy and is beneficial to every country. Several countries have introduced policies to promote gender parity. In 2018, Iceland became the first nation to make pay inequality illegal and currently imposes a fine on companies that don’t comply. Rwanda, too, made recent moves toward gender parity by creating inclusive economic policies. However, Rwanda is an exception to most economically disadvantaged countries. Countries that dedicate the least amount of attention toward gender parity are usually peripheral, such as Chad, Syria, and Pakistan.
 REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH The GII is the first major index to include reproductive health indicators as a measure of gender inequality. It uses two barometers related to women’s reproductive health: one measures maternal deaths related to childbirth and the other measures births among adolescent mothers. 
The maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. The MMR is considered a good indicator of women’s access to health care because maternal deaths usually result from a lack of adequate care before, during, and just after childbirth. According to a 2019 report compiled by the World Health Organization, UNICEF, the UN Population Fund, and the World Bank, the worldwide MMR fell by 38 percent between 2000 and 2017, from 342 deaths to 211 deaths per 100,000 live births. During that time period, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa had substantial ratio reductions of 59 percent and 39 percent, respectively. While these improvements are impressive, these two regions accounted for 86 percent of maternal deaths around the world, with sub-Saharan Africa suffering an MMR of 533.
 The adolescent birth rate (ABR) is the number of births per 1,000 women aged 15 to 19. Early childbearing is associated with increased health risks for mothers and infants as well as keeping young mothers from accessing higher education. In 2018, the global average was 44 per 1,000 15- to 19-year-old women. The countries with the highest ABRs were Niger (184), Mali (167), and Chad (158), all sub-Saharan African countries. On the other end of the spectrum, South Korea’s ABR was 1, Switzerland’s was 3, and Singapore, Slovenia, Japan, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Cyprus each had an ABR of 4. The United States’ adolescent birth rate was 19.
 EMPOWERMENT Women’s empowerment includes women’s options and access to participate fully in the social and economic spheres of a society. The GII uses two indicators to measure women’s empowerment: political representation and educational attainment. Political representation, which concerns women’s civic involvement, is measured by the ratio of women with seats in government compared with men. The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) tracks this information.
 Women have traditionally been greatly outnumbered by men at every level of government. Gender inequality in the political sphere has improved over the last 25 years, but women are still underrepresented in decision-making political roles. Progress is occurring, albeit slowly. In 1995, 57 women held seats in the U.S. Congress, but by 2018, the number more than doubled to 127 women. However, that total is only 20 percent of all seats. Globally, the number of women in national legislatures increased from 11 percent in 1995 to 24.3 percent in 2019. However, 27 countries have less than 10 percent female participation in their parliaments. The majority of these countries are peripheral countries in Africa and Asia. 
The countries that do have higher numbers of women in important political seats are a compelling mix. Core countries top the list, illustrated by the Scandinavian countries that have consistently had women holding around two-fifths of its seats in the legislatures since 2000. Interestingly, around 30 percent of the top 30 countries with the highest percentage of women in government are countries that have recently ended wars. 
Rwanda is a strong example of this. Every year since 2004, Rwanda has had more women in its parliament than any other country in the world. Rwanda is not economically strong, but it experienced a social upheaval in the 1990s that caused this gender shift. In the devastating genocide of 1994, approximately 800,000 Rwandans were killed, most were men. The president at the time decided that women would be the key to rebuilding the country, and in 2003, he added a decree to the constitution stating that at least 30 percent of political seats would be filled by women. Clearly, the roles of women changed in Rwanda as the country redeveloped after a crippling tragedy. Having women in decision-making roles tends to help a country improve its social and economic inequalities.
 By 2019, underrepresentation of women remained an issue in every region and country of the world, though some countries saw progress in closing the gender gap in political representation. The only three countries that have reached or surpassed gender parity in their governments are Rwanda, Cuba, and Bolivia. According to the Pew Research Center, seats held by women in Nordic countries average around 40 percent, with Sweden at the high end (47 percent) and Denmark on the low end (37 percent). These countries score well on gender equality indices. At the other end of the spectrum, 28 countries throughout the world still fall short when it comes to political equality, with women making up less than 10 percent of their legislatures. Yemen, Oman, and Haiti have less than 3 percent female representation in their national parliaments.
Educational attainment, the second indicator of women’s empowerment, is measured by the ratio of adult women and adult men (age 25 and older) with some secondary education. Studies show that women’s access to education affects their social and economic opportunities as well as their health outcomes. UNESCO tracks this data by country and region. Although there are some advances in educational achievement, UNESCO points out that it still sees disparities. More girls than boys remain out of school; according to UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics, 16 million girls will never set foot in a classroom. An alarming 9 million of these girls are in sub-Saharan Africa.
 In addition, women account for two-thirds of all adults who lack basic literacy skills. In 2013, the majority of illiterate women ages 15 to 24 came from nine countries: India, Pakistan, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Bangladesh, Democratic Republic of Congo, United Republic of Tanzania, Egypt, and Burkina Faso. UNESCO reports that the many obstacles preventing women and girls from participating in education include poverty, geographic isolation, minority status, disability, early marriage and pregnancy, gender-based violence, and traditional attitudes about the status and role of women. Women who are able to complete a higher level of education see an expansion of their freedom because their education strengthens their capacity to question, to reflect and act on their condition, and to enter the workforce with more skills.
 LABOR-MARKET PARTICIPATION The labor-market participation (LMP) rate measures an economy’s active labor force and is calculated by taking the sum of all employed workers and dividing that number by the working-age population. (The LMP is also known as labor-force participation, or LFP rate.) Identifying participation in formal and informal sectors allows geographers to make generalized assumptions about other important social indicators, such as the availability of education and health care, infant mortality, and gender equality. The conclusion that a high labor-force participation rate equals a highly economically developed country is not necessarily true. For example, Mozambique has one of the highest LMP rates in the world, but it doesn’t have a strong economy. Also, the rates of LMP vary between genders in many countries. Male LMP tends to be high while female LMP tends to be low, and the variation between these two rates is even more pronounced in countries that practice distinct gender roles.
 The roles that women play in a country’s workforce often reflect that country’s level of economic development. Core countries usually have more women working full-time jobs outside the home. Women in core countries are able to pursue careers in the tertiary sector that require a college education. Women in peripheral and semi-peripheral countries participate mainly in the primary and secondary sectors, do work just to provide food for the family, or perform unpaid work, often in the informal sector. These same groups of women also have high birth rates. Both the labor-intensive jobs and high birth rates are factors that inhibit women’s ability to participate fully in economic and social spaces—which in turn holds back a country’s development.
 At the same time, female labor-market participation does not solely describe a country’s economic development, as seen in some African countries in the periphery and semi-periphery. In Mozambique, Rwanda, Malawi, and Togo, the LMP is close to, or even slightly above, 100 percent. How can more than 100 percent of women be in a country’s workforce? These data reflect gender parity in labor-force participation or the fact that more women than men are participating in the labor market in that country. At the same time, female labor-market participation is also high in some of the richest countries in the world. Interestingly, the female LMP is lowest in countries that are right in the middle with average national incomes.
